One can convey the body with rapture, competing, very early on in the transfer, you have
that intention to convey the body, which is relaxing, which is energizing.
The important thing is to know that it's on the level of intention, so it's on the
level of your mind, not on the level of observation of physical sensations or body sweeping
or whatever else people might do.
All of those little things that you're kind of trying to patch up, they're all imping
this intention.
But if you're not seeing the intention to convey the body with rapture, none of these
things can actually bring any understanding, and that's an important thing, you want
to develop understanding.
You don't want to just keep having to go through body sweeping, the attention, relaxing,
relaxation technique, shavasana or whatever else, because again, that's all, well, it's
aiming at the wrong thing, and that wrong thing might sometimes imply the correct intention,
but you don't even know what correct intention is, which means you want to discern it.
So perverting your body with rapture or relaxing your body, it's done to the body as a
unit, as a whole, through that general intention of relaxing.
And you can even relax yourself by trying to understand what the relaxing is, as a phenomenon.
Just as I say, relaxing, relaxing, what is relaxing?
Like if somebody tells me to relax, and I want to relax, what do I think?
What is the attitude that I have?
And that attitude, basically it's an attitude towards, from attitudes of the mind in regard
to the body as a whole, not just as I said before, towards your elbows or shoulders or
whatever else, as a whole, it's all the other things people do in a country, just because
they don't really know where to look, and then all these things might sometimes injure
the genuine relaxing, the genuine rapture, but they don't know why or how, which means
they don't understand it, so they just stumble upon it when it comes, and they don't,
they wouldn't know how to do it again, because you know when people say, oh, in the
sutras, oh, I am taking janas at will, that's done through understanding, to pull understanding
what janas are, and then you just say, again, you know, they don't come by chance.
Yeah, janas is a particular attitude, particular establishment of mind in regard to the body,
and then you keep refining that, but it's the same, it's the same principle.
But you're going to be able to notice that general attitude of whatever it is that you
want relaxation, for example, you've got to be able to, oh, I know how to relax.
Well, exactly, yeah, and you know how to relax, but trying to find out how to relax.
Yeah.
Again, find out in terms of discerning the nature of what end-tension to relax is at
the time, not just by reading about some, I don't know, relaxation self-help books and stuff
like that.
So, if I tell you just, can you just relax now, just sit and relax, and you can kind
of let it sort of, oh, quickly, whatever, but if you stop and think about it, what would
you do?
What would you intend, what kind of attitude would you arouse in regard to the, your present
situation that is sort of routine in your body, if you want to relax, if you want to relax.
So you could describe it in different ways, then, you could say up a very, very red
chair, you could do this, who you can say, like what, what, what, what the Anaprasad
said, says, calming, calming down the bodily determinations, so the bodily, the samkara
is basically things, things upon which, sorry, bodily things upon which other things depend,
but you don't, again, samkaras are always plural in that sense, but what you can, what
you can do is recognize that plurality as a single phenomenon, so your body as a whole,
has all sorts of manifestations, all sorts of intentionality that pertains to that, so
you do basically, it's, oh, you can't that hold down, and all of these particular things
account as a result.
If you have the intention of calming down your body on that general level, on your mental
level, then whatever you do with that body cannot be not calmed, if you generally calmed.
Because you, usually, I would think, yeah, you calm down your breath, you make the breath,
yeah, light or slower, and then that's what affect your body, that's going to affect
your muscles, whatever, like still trying to mess around in a particular way.
Yeah, chasing this, the mother is out in that, but basically sometimes people say, yeah,
but it helps me, or, and the only reason it helps is because at the time, that particular
thing they're trying to calm down stands for the both experiences of bodies as a whole,
because if you're so concerned over, you know, I don't know, some particular aspect of
your body that's worrying you or that it's, that it's extremely not calmed or whatever
else, then yeah, calming that down would stand for calming down the whole body, because
basically for that time, that particular aspect of the body stands for that which body
is in your experience as a whole, and, but that's why people who do have that view and
do that, they can't do it at will, they can only do it when it happens that the particular
aspect they're focusing on stands for the body as a whole, but that won't always be the
case, sometimes there won't be any particular aspect and then it will be just kind of generic
collection particular aspect, that's then for the single phenomenon of the body in this
experience as a whole.
So, if, if a person wants to practice calming down the body as a meditation, basically,
what initially, the most important thing would be to not allow himself, to, to descend
onto like particular aspects of the body, just stay with the mental thought of calming down
the body, because again, that's all it, it doesn't, you don't need more than that, calming
down the body results in calmedness, then obviously the mind needs more, wants more, doesn't
mean more, wants more, wants to say, what is it?
Well, exactly, wants to designate it in the, in the term, that it's used, and those terms
are not subtle enough to designate the phenomenon of calming down the body as a phenomenon, as
a general phenomenon, they're just not subtle enough, so as I said before, instead of then
coursing up, so to speak, how the body feels and trying to pin it down and go into sensations
or whatever else, you should actually define those designations you're trying to designate
that general feeling, sorry, general phenomenon of the body as a whole, it begins to sound
abstract, but that's, you know, whenever you read like in the sutras, when the Buddha
speaks about meditation and perception of light or this, yeah, people, people lose it,
they can't start on the same, but in this particular instance, basically, all you have
to do is just remember that you have no choice but have your body right there and then,
okay, learn how to relax without ending up thinking particular things, particular aspects
about the body, just think about calming down, what does that mean, as a phenomenon, calming
down, how is that done, not even specifically regarding body, just if, just, I tell you,
as an external person, as another to you, I tell you, I, after, and a designation calmed
down, so you do have a degree of, of, of meaning in regard to that designation, my not
correspond 100% to what I regard calming down is, but certainly enough that we are able
to talk and discuss it and communicate, to an extent, but there's a thing, for yourself
then, you can take up that designation calmed down and see how far you can take it, without,
you know, forming into some psychological explanations and things that go, no, no, it
is this, so it might be that, no, and just, just for you, in your own terms, without
resorting to anything external, an act of calming down, can you do it anytime, can you do anything,
what is it basically, do you discern, do you see, because I think, I think it will be
a mistake if I start imagining calmed things, yeah, yeah, no, no, that's again, that's
like basically, trying to induce the calmedness to doing things that you think might actually
result in it, and they sometimes might, but not for the reasons you think, they would,
but an image of, say, an image might arise in the mind due to the fact that I have the
intention to become, like I might have a, yeah, yeah, but that, because your concern is
not in regard to that image, but it's in regard to intention to become, then those
images you can second it, so things like, it's just, you're just talking about, at the
edge, or, let's say, just like anger, I mean, you, you, you're overcome with anger, and
your body is really in a state shaking, whatever, not shouting, but just this anger, so intention
non-anger, you need to, you need to establish that, but it's quite, which is quite difficult
to constate, I mean, what it is, it is basically, the only reason you were able to, what,
the only reason one was able to get so angry in a, in a state of, you know, being shaken
by anger and so on, is because the intention of non-anger hasn't really been developed,
so at that time, all you have to do is just gr, your teeth and, and, and, and, and you,
and all act upon that intention, and then when you're not that angry, practice intention
non-anger, practice of intention of, uh, dispelling the, you know, kind of, looming anger or
looming bad mood and so on, but it's, it's seeing it at its very early stages, so to
speak, right, discerning it, and then training in regard to that, and then it will never
come to that fully blown anger where you're like, you know what you're doing, your resistance
resistance, yeah, it starts with resistance, starts with aversion and then you just, you,
you don't look at it, you know it, you turn a blind eye, you give into it because it's,
oh, well, it's not, I'm not as angry, so it's okay and whatever else, but then it ends
up being accumulated and then eventually you get varying, you're nothing, always some
silly things, just they just become kind of, uh, an excuse to let the whole, the whole
thing out, you're always aware by the way, people can never be like, completely, oh yeah,
the saying you know what, you always know what you're doing, because anger or the same
with lust, you know, as powerful as they can get, they're always rooted in bad faith,
which means you always know what you're doing, but you're coming to get up, you know, you
don't get me, you're just not recognizing that you are, well no, you refuse basically
to, just, you, you refuse to, yeah, you refuse to look at the fact that you know what
you're doing and then you just let that, that built up anger or built up lust go, you just
go, go with it, because it, yeah, it sounds, it's mindfulness in a way like the knowing that
you are aware of something, yeah, admitting to yourself, yeah, that's my mindfulness feeds
authentic attitude, attitude of not, it's basically an attitude of non-self deception.
And then another thing, maybe it's probably, probably useful to mention, back on to meditation
if you just practice the intention of calming down the body in general or relaxing, but
everyone will call it, it's important to know that then, yeah, you might start feeling
your body differently, because, you know, you've been, you've been cultivating intention
coming and then your body might just start feeling, whatever, light or, or, or just, well
I'm like, oh, I don't feel my body anymore, but that's the thing, that's all relative
to your day to day life, how you used to feeling your body.
So it's not actually any accomplishment in itself, to like feel your body, I don't
know, like light, light cloud or whatever else, it's all a novelty just in regard to how
you're used to feeling your body.
And that's all fine, as long as you don't then become sort of too concerned, to obsess
too keen on having your body felt like that all the time.
That's again falling down onto particular and forgetting that it was about intention to
just calm down the body.
Now, what that intention results in, it's all secondary and you do not care about that.
So sometimes you can be very calm and your body will feel very normal, you won't feel
any light, you know, whatever, tingling, tingling, sensation, I don't know, but basically
how people, I don't know how people would describe it, but you know what I mean, when
you relax your body and then, well, you might be struggling for words to describe it,
because it becomes different to how you used to kind of perceive your body in your day-to-day
life.
But, no matter how ambiguously you might be perceiving your body at the time as a result
of that coming down, that's irrelevant, there was never the goal.
The goal is not to actually feel or perceive these certain ways the body can be felt or
perceived.
It's about recognizing this certain and cultivating intention to calm down the phenomenon
of body, to calm down the nature of body.
You see when you're doing this, practicing these kind of intentions and then seeing, noticing
the results of these intentions, I can't, I actually can't body, whatever particular
things happen.
Can you get a bit greed?
Well, no, well, yeah, imagine me, but I always thought I'd just think about, so I had to
think about the principle that's happening, yes, that is, the terms is, and it was not this
world.
Yeah, be happy, you know, the other particular things might be happy.
It's just, it's basically just another step in a course of developing your mind.
So, you study your mind in regard to recognizing intention to calm down, calming down the
body.
Now, the pleasant results as a result of that, now you have to train your mind in regard
to them, because now they're putting you a bit too much, now you want to always have
that calm body and never, no, that calm body wasn't yours to begin with.
Intention was, well, even intention wasn't yours, because that intention would be incernable,
inc disernable, I don't know where this world is, but well, it would be impossible to discern
if that body was not already there, so because that body pertains, sorry, because that intention
pertains to that body, that's what, every intention is mental, but because it pertains
to the body in its nature, in regard to the body, it's a bodily intention, but every
intention manifests on the life of the mind, but it's a bodily intention, so the body
has a possibility to be calm, so all you're doing, you're attending possibility of calm
in regard to body, and that's a bodily intention of calm down.
You are, there is no subject there that it's actually producing that intention towards
this external body, or rather that, which is the subject producing the intention in regard
to external body, that subject also belongs to that external body through that intention,
thus it's not really subject, because it's the comms of body, the intention to calm,
totally in regard to body and the nature of body, and that subject that inevitably appears
for protugina in regard to that body, it's there, it's like a counterpart, a negative,
sort of phenomenon in regard to the whole thing, and you don't have to worry about it in
terms of trying to abolish it, or remove it, that's impossible, you actually have to
acknowledge it, and then stop regarding it as yours, and that's it, that's all you
take, and by not regarding it as yours, that subject will cease to be the center of your
experience, becomes the other side, it's not matter, it just becomes an individual arising
and ceasing in the same way, pancha, pancha, kanga rises and ceases, until they completely
break apart and part in the body, that's it.
What about awareness, this attention being paid to, certain things like that, I'm recognising
me.
Well, the awareness in itself, it's, you can't descend that, there's not such thing
as awareness, the thing is, you can say, oh, pure awareness, but you fail to see that
your designation, the very words you used as pure awareness stands for the matter in
regard to which you're aware, thus there is no pure awareness as such, because if there
were, well, you wouldn't be able to utter it, you wouldn't be able to discern it, and
in that way, it means you can't be.
There is the noticing of that, also present with other particular things like the matter.
Sure, you can discern that, but you can't, in the same sense with the said, you can't
separate feelings, perception, intention, they're conjuring, they're not disjointed, you
don't want an exam yet, so that's all I'm pointing out, basically, yeah, you can say
there is awareness in regard to it, and there is, there is noticing of it, but just make
sure you don't mystify it, that it doesn't become an emptied in itself of pure noticing,
pure awareness, justine awareness, all sorts of terms you might end up using.
I mean, you have to see it in the context.
So no, you just have to discern, because it's always in the context, you don't have to
see it, it is always in the context, so you just have to actually find it in that context,
in the context that it has a reason, and that's the thing, because you might recognize in
the context once or twice, and then you develop a view that this thing is always in the context,
and then you put the context over the, actually, already, a reason context, and even if that
is the same context, the fact that you are putting it over means you're assuming it, and
that's the wrong thing to do, even if you're assuming it rightly.
So eventually you want to stop assuming any context and just be discerning the reason
context.
And that, that count again, by knowing that that context is always there, you know, ah,
it's just a question of time with me discerning it, if that's how you look at it.
And you can discern it by learning how to see it, so to speak, not by writing it with
your own terms, but actually reading it, the way it has a reason, but in order to
read it, you have to know how, you know, to know how it's written, so to speak, to learn
their language, and their language is nothing other than what I said before, it's basically
training your mind in, in, well, when you become a subtler, then the designation that you
used to, ah, what you used to have, you used to entertain in regard to these, these things
they will pertain to the mind.
So for example, many people wouldn't say that their thoughts exist, because for them they
are used to, for them, for them, the measure of existence is what they, what they are so
used to, so entrenching, that they get through the senses.
So then their thoughts are just these, well, I mean, but they fail to see that's already
contradiction, because just by saying, oh my thoughts don't really exist, you would designate
that very thing, that then you deny to be existing, why?
Because for you, Bava existence has been quite sort of charged up, brought up, far
out, whereby now pertains to the just senses and the, the, the, the palpable aspects of
your five senses.
That's how Bava grows, Bava accumulates, you know, it's not, it's not a static thing,
so to speak.
It's not a nature, Bava, Bava existence exists, but for some people things can exist
more, if they have more significance, if they have more weight, if there is more lust
and aversion and delusion in regard to it, they proliferate, they accumulate, they get
heavier.
They just stop there, well, you just stop by recognizing that, oh, hold on, if my thoughts
don't exist, how can I even think about it?
So they exist just much subtler than things that you might grab with your hand or see with
your eyes.
And then you start recognizing what's in common then, what is in common to things that
I can see with my eyes, things I can grab with my hand, and things I can think about.
Well, it's, what is in common is that they actually, all of them are thorough, they're
all mental images, they're all dumbness.
Okay, there you go, you already got the nature of things.
That nature of things is to appear as an image, to rise on its own.
And then you recognize, yeah, that is what comes first, not the fact that I'm holding
it in my hand.
I'm only able to hold this thing in my hand is because there was already a mental image
of a hand, things to be held, a sense, a sense object.
All of that was already meant, that's why the senses would not operate if the mind is
not, you know, the range, sort of, if the mind is not in control of them, obviously the
mind is not in control because people don't practice restraint.
But they do meet in mind, in mind as a final and first, say, mind comes first.
So then it just comes down to repetition of that recognition of what these damas are.
Okay, this is an object, but again, there you go, you're designated as an object, which
is a mental image.
The whole designation, so everything becomes recognized because everything already is a
mental image.
A mental image that pertains to the senses, a mental image that pertains to a mental
image, that's the mind.
And the more you practice that, the more your mind withdraws from the threshold of being
there was set far out in the sense world because you recognize, you just fade away because
now the mind recognizes more, greater nature of it.
Over, but it's bound to cease, cease, well, that's when the mind cease to be established
upon anything, so then you do have things arising and ceasing but they don't really exist
because existence, power, it's that significance, charge with that significance of mind, for
me, significance of lust, aversion, or delusion, so you remove that, and then you can say
you just have mirror rising and you're ceasing but they don't exist.
That's again, I think, well, that's what I brought about in that I say appearance is an
existence, for particular, but basically let's say that you can't have existence without
appearance, but you can have appearance without existence, but obviously most of the people
who are far down at the end of existence and they look back all the seeds existence,
so for them appearance existence is the same, but if you actually start walking up, but
reversing that thing, there would be a point where you went across and there it was not,
things appear and they don't exist anymore.
There's kind of no weight to it, yeah, exactly, you're drained, dead, you know, with a root
cut off like a palm stump, so the palm stump is still there appearing but instead it's not
charged anymore, it's not proliferating anymore, but it doesn't reduce feelings anymore,
it cannot be the cause of suffering anymore, it's just done, cut off.
And even that would break apart eventually, for another ambient appearance breaks apart
when the idea is break apart and that's it, it doesn't re-emerge, for that very reason,
you re-emerge because of that charge in regard to appearance remaining, even at the time
of death, but you remove the significance of mind, the personality, the self, the all of
those things come from that very same charge of existence, weight, weight to it.
And again, you can actually, you can arrive at that by just, what I said, you can say,
sure, everything exists, means everything, well everything affects you in a way, everything
has a certain significance to you, why, because you take yourself to be, you are, I am.
So all of that, all of that existence, what does it have in common then?
The essence of the sense of drinks, of the senses, of the sense pleasures, existence of
the thoughts, abstract thoughts, imaginary thoughts, for me.
Well, for you, well, what it has in common is it appears as a mental image.
And then yeah, that mental image is affected with a parasite that kind of makes you think
it's for you, thus I must be.
But obviously you can undo that, only once you first acknowledge it as a mental image.
And then mental image is not in your head, then mental image is right there where the
things are.
So the distance, saying looking at the other side of the valley on that hill over there,
mental image is right there, there, out there.
But then saying out there, that's another mental image, so the whole space, it's a mental,
so in the sense, I mean, it's probably not the best way to call mental image because
for most of the people, if we'd imply, it's only in my head, and then we'll be like
form of idealism, saying it's only in my mind, no, your mind is not yours to begin with,
which means your mind is out there with things, and you are not there.
So you can just say an image, or you can just say a dhamma, or a thought.
But again, thought already has connotation for many people, as opposed to the senses.
Oh, this is the real world, and then this is the world of my thoughts.
But whether it's a thought, whether it's the real world, what they have, in common, they
have a common, in common to appear as an image.
As a phenomenon.
But now obviously, with Europeans saying phenomenon, ah, it's just philosophy, it's just some
way philosophy we don't, you know, it's not to call it whatever you want, but phenomenon
would be the most, well, it would be the most accurate, actually, designation for it
to appear, as an nature to appear, that's it, everything as an nature to appear.
Even the most abstract and big use, impossible to define, thoughts, they appear as such.
So then, when you start discerning the appearance within existence, existence would become redundant,
eventually.
Everything becomes equal in that sense.
In an emotional sense, yes, nothing is what, yeah, that's why I don't think it's always
a piece, immovable, there's no like, I mean, there are, ah, inherent significances, you
know, that still stays, so like, you, we wouldn't start using, you know, ah, I've
come up to, to sweep the leaves, because that's not the significance of the cup.
But now these significances would be, ah, implying, would it, well, sorry, it would contain
any more, any emotional significance of my cup, my dear cup, or my lovely broom, I really
like this broom to be really practical, or even before you, it won't be yours, so it
would be a cup for drinking, broom for sweeping, I mean, if you want to mess about, you can
just try sweeping leaves with a cup, but it would be ridiculous, and it wouldn't work.
But then again, it would be an intention to try something ridiculous, but even that
wouldn't be for you.
So in that sense, you would not be affected by any of it, and you certainly wouldn't
be able to feel any, any suffering or pressure of any feeling in regard to it.
But doesn't mean your mind would be caught blank or something, no, everything stays the
same, you just don't feel anything in regard to it anymore, but it doesn't mean that you
negate or destroy or ignore significance of things.
That's why our hands were not recognized by ordinary people, external, sometimes they
look worse, they behavior, or things they would say.
So since we're talking about existence, father, father, if you're just saying assumption
determinants, father, that's the cause of it, and not based on the extent of your assumption
that's how far father will be established.
The assumption being assumption?
Yeah, this is not seeing it as LFPS first of all.
Well yeah, yeah, I mean assumption basically, you take it to be something without actually
knowing whether there is that what you take it to be.
So assuming a context, which you said before, there is a context of an original experience,
but then you can also assume the context of an original experience.
And for you at the time, because you assume it is the real context, it doesn't correspond
to the actual context of the original experience, but because all you have is your assumption
of that context, it is what it is, it is that.
That's why once you undo the assumption, you can't arise again, because you can only
arise when you take things that are faced with, when you don't really know if it is like
that or not.
Once you know that it is like that or not, you can't then, okay, now I assume that it
is this.
Here is basically assumption, it is taking a stand in regard to anything without actually
knowing whether that stand is right or not.
And that goes to very subtle levels, so you assume assumption in regard to senses.
And the fundamental assumption, the things are for you, the things are yours, and you don't
have to worry about trying to chase this and just start with that fundamental assumption
and if you don't do all of the other assumptions, assumption, sensuality and use and everything
else.
Assumption of me, because you look, okay, well now you can actually ask that anybody, okay,
so what is that you, where are you, who are you, what is it, and you wouldn't, but then
there is a very strong notion of me, and that notion is real because that assumption of
me has been never questioned, never challenged, never discerned, so then you did really develop
a sense of me based on constantly assuming that things are for you.
So just stop assuming that things are for you, and then the assumption of me will fade
because you won't be feeling it anymore.
What about this, you know, people ask you, what is myself, and it says, you know, why
are questions about self and the world, and answerable?
Well, the question is just asked, why is it, because it implies that there is actually
something that is yourself.
You say, what is myself means, yeah, so we both agree that there is yourself and I
just ask me what it is, but that's a wrong question because we don't agree that there
is yourself, I don't agree.
So if you ask me that question, I'm not going to answer it in a way that would just sort
of make you think you were right to ask it in the first place, and you were not right
to ask it in the first place because that question assumes the sense of self.
It doesn't question, hold on, is there a sense of self?
Am I wrong in thinking that I am, you don't ask that, you ask, what is myself?
So you already take for granted, there is yourself, so now you just need to know what
it is.
Which is kind of funny, because it's like you really know what it is, they are ready for
yourself.
Well, exactly, that's why the Buddha would be silent, or replying, you know, what seemingly
unrelated manner, saying describing, but it's not valid, describing the, or the dependent
origination.
Because if you were to see that again, things arise on their own, they manifest, the nature
is to be manifest there, and you're not saying that, anything, your senses, your thoughts,
you already find there, or you can do, you can intend to talk for it, you can, you know,
you can pursue it, you can build your whole life, but fundamentally your senses and things
in that you got to your senses, they're just there, you just use them, and you certainly
have no access to, no reason of you into where they came from, or even just asking where,
even the assumption that they came from somewhere doesn't even, even doesn't apply to them,
they're just given, and then they go, when you die basically.
So just recognizing that, that they're inaccessible, the only thing you can do is like secondarily
use them, means they can't really be yours, because if it's yours, you would have it.
That's why it's often in the city, like a borrowed, borrowed goal, or jewelry, it's not
yours, it's gonna be, and you know, like everybody knows they'll die, everybody knows
the senses will fall apart, yet you still go ahead and use it as if it belongs to you.
So what you have to do is remove that sense of belonging in regard to things that you're
using, and what are the things that you're using, your eyes, your nose, your ears, your
mind basically, all of the senses and your mind, that was in that sort of, when they, when
they were said, it's because people take that which belongs to Mata, Mata does what he wants
with them, and account of it.
What are the things that belong to Mata, its eyes and forms, ears and sounds, basically,
is pretty much nothing else in between, so everything belongs to Mata, and the problem
is not you using it, like you can use it wearily, like the, the, the, the, the bait, the
problem is, you're appropriating it, as you're taking it to be yours, so you're appropriating
it, you're using Mata actually, well through using, you end up appropriating it, because
you're using it wearily, it has this using work, what do you mean, well, because it's the
intention to do something, well using works by, by doing it without taking it to be
yours.
But when you cut things up, when you slice them apart, you see there's intention, there's
any tension there, to, to use something, to attend to something, okay, and so on, but
there's no, there's no station in position where I sit, where I am, the self, I can, I'll
use my intention, I'll use my body, you know, there is no, there is no station in position,
but, because people do regard their intentions as yours, as theirs, as belonging to them,
they generate, as a result of that, there is a sense of self, there is a sense of center,
there is a sense of me, and then you can then appropriate that center as well, so you
might kind of pull out from all of these particular things, and you cannot mind, like putrogen
it can be free from centrality, you let go of that, but still hold on to their self-use,
sense of self.
The sense of you could say in this rightful, what you can call it right for is the person,
the guy, just the person, what about it?
That's what you can call the sense is not free, well, that's how you can call it appropriate
that center, stop regarding that center, you start seeing that center as depending upon
things that are centered around it, it won't be your center anymore, that's why the Buddha
said that was a king, my self-esteem, I can't remember the name, he said, well, would the
king, a king, would a king, be determined as a king without his king's possessions, without
his caste, without his queen, without his appointment, without all these things, without his ownership
of the great armies, he wouldn't be a king, he might call himself a king, if he is delusional,
he won't be a king, if nobody ever appointed him, he is not born in a family that appoints
himself as king and then their offspring as king, that he appropriates externally, I am
the king, he wouldn't be a king, so all of these possessions, the title, everything
else, are the things that determine that center of me as a king, so you then start seeing
all these things that you take it to be yours, as not yours, then you, you will fail, because
it's not I am, therefore things are mine, it's because I take things to be mine, therefore
I end up being, but that sense of remains, well, the center remains in a sense, but again,
in a sense, in a sense, you can say appearance remains, but existence ceases, so that's
only known once existence ceases, so once you let go of that center, you can say, you
can see what sort of center remains, but it can be a very different sense of center than
a sense of center that Patujana is used to, or not very different if he was a very wise
and restrained Patujana and then he just needed, he had little dust in his eyes, he depends
how far off center have you established your Patujana center, so that comes back to the
center. Cool. But again, if all of this being existence phenomena, it's sort of feeling
too much, just restart, and the first step is, why do you want to practice at all, to be
free from suffering, and you can just revolve around that, why? Because becoming free from
suffering frees you from sense itself, frees you from existence, frees you from all of
it, so it's just different approaches, for different people obviously, some need to
come from this angle, the others from that angle, but if it's just, you know, if you just
can't help but have it, oh this is all abstract, I just can't get my head around it, you
might not necessarily have to, but you will have to get your head around something else,
maybe not on the same intellectual level, because not all people have the same faculties,
but certainly there is no question of, oh, can I get this done with less effort? The
same amount of effort needs to be, well, virtually the same, not completely the same, but almost
the same amount of effort needs to be put in by every petitioner, just in regard to different
things or a different approach, the effort of repetition, the effort of drilling, the
effort of endurance, the effort of strength, but again, it's all done for the same goal,
being free from suffering, being free from possibility to suffer, which is suffering,
that's it, so might be my sense of self, my center, okay, why am I doing this, the
brief free from suffering, understand the flow of the truth then, and that's it, and
then you start discerning all the other things that Buddha was talking about within that principle,
oh, you're going to have to look left and right from it, try there, why do you suffer?
What is suffering, to what extent? When does this agreeable become suffering? Is this
agreeable suffering? Can you have this agreeable without actually suffering on the contrary?
Quite useful questions to contemplate on, because most people disagreeable, in the same
sense, again, there you go, I just said, it's all the same, it revolves around the same principles,
in the same sense I said, you can have appearance without resistance, but you can't have
existence without appearance, you can have this agreeable without suffering, but you can't
have suffering without this agreeable, you can't have suffering without this agreeable,
you can't suffer if there's nothing disagreeable, but you can have this agreeable without suffering,
so, and it's because you can't suffer without a disagreeable experience, that's where people
by default assume, removing this agreeable means removing suffering, but that is always
stepping it, that is going into the domain that doesn't belong to you, the domain of agreeable
and disagreeable, things that just arise as agreeable and disagreeable, there's some use,
suffering in regard to it is yours, so it's your attitude in regards to agreeable or disagreeable
that's making you suffer, so whenever there is disagreeable, you suffer, because of your
attitude in regard to disagreeable, so in that sense, it's the middle way, it's the middle
way because you don't go and just remove disagreeable altogether, you can't, because you're
not in control of that, you never were, you can't stop eyes from seeing ears from hearing
mind from thinking, or, or, or, more certainly, you cannot order it, to only see pleasant things
and hear pleasant things and think pleasant things impossible, why, because in a pleasant
can be a source of, source of disagreeable, if you start thinking about more pleasant,
which is, which is, you know, not that you're kind of experiencing, well, that's a disagreeable
experience, you created a disagreeable discrepancy, and now you suffer in a country because you
lost for more, what you have is far from enough, you used to be enough, but because the mind
was under strain, you created discrepancy upon which you got established, and now you just
create need, depend on more, and you become very unhappy, very, very affected by suffering,
in regard to very pleasant experiences, so your, your attitude towards disagreeable,
and agreeable, yeah, is what basically makes yourself, and that attitude is actually the
craving, not wanting disagreeable and wanting, yeah, overstepping it, it's a changing
the attitude to be, yeah, knowing, but first knowing that you, you should stop being concerned
about the actual agreeable and disagreeable, so you don't go trying to change the circumstances,
I mean, of course, if you live in a middle of a city, in a horrible environment, and you
want to become an adult, well, you have to change those circumstances, but it's not what
I'm talking about, but I'm talking about is if, I mean, somebody said something that
upset you, you're responsible for the upset, you're not responsible for what's being said,
so if you suffer, it's on you, why? because suffering is present when craving is present,
craving in regard to agreeable and disagreeable, not, it's not that suffering is present when
agreeable or disagreeable is present, no, you can have agreeable and disagreeable without
actually suffering, at all, so somebody said something that upset you, default position
response is to well, either get upset and say something back that will hurt them, or
if perhaps you have been more restrained, then well, that's good in my talk, or wanting
in their apology, you want to affect it on that external level where it came from, but
actually you're not, you're, again, as I said, you're always stepping in, you're misplacing
it, that was not the suffering to begin with, it was your attitude in regard to that,
which has come your way in terms of somebody saying something, and the first thing you
recognize is like, well, there's always going to be something disagreeable in the world,
even if I get all of the people to be on my side, to agree with me, to always succinct
phrases of me, something else will always be disagreeable, which means there's always
something else that might come your way that you're not going to like, eventually, aging
sickness and death, and that's it, and you know, there isn't a sugarcoating that, so
you recognize it's inevitable, but then, again, see, oh my goodness, it's all depressing
now, everything is inevitable in that sense, everything is just going to come to horrible
disagreeable end, so you could see people falling into despair if they start thinking
about it, and then imagine, well, imagine the extent of the Buddha's discovery there,
within that, you manage to discern that none of that is actually caused for the pain that
you feel, or you might feel for the suffering, none of that, so imagine that like seen through
these just layers of identical glass, yet you start discerning them, without any external
input, without he didn't have another Buddha's guidance, he saw it from the inside, which
is what, which is a mirror, which is you know, that's why he's the Buddha, it's easier
for us now, because we have it like lay down, pointed out, you know, outlined by the Buddha
and I had other hands and so on, and the sutras, mainly, only, so you then, now you know
what to look for from that inside, so that, so again, that's the whole point is
basically, when you recognize, oh, wow, the freedom lies within that, right through the
center of that, complete freedom, because the problem was never disagreeable, no matter
how disagreeable it was, even if it was a high-rate order, so in your names and so on,
that was never the issue, the issue was the fact that you were touched by it, and you were
touched by it because you were picking it up, because you were touching it, there's a hot
stove and you put a hand on it, always, and you don't know how to stop it, and then you
start blaming the stove, and you want to try to remove it, and the bowl is a stove,
but it's not yours, and you can't do it, okay, simply find it a bit, but basically, craving
as a mental attitude is the cause, so simultaneously, and that's it, that's why it's part of it,
it's simultaneous presence, simultaneous dependence, it's inconceivable to have duke present,
duke a reason, if there is no, at the same time, to the same extent, tanha present, tanha
a reason, absence of tanha, absence of duke, presence of tanha, presence of duke,
could you have a, could you have a intention of non craving, yeah, that's what you guys
mean, but not when there is no craving, because then that intention would be craving, intention
of non craving, it has to be in regard to craving, when there is no craving, when there is
no craving, you intending to not craving, would be craving, yeah, that's why how did you cross
the shore, well, by not fighting the waves, by not kind of going backwards, and by not
standing still, so at the time, you intend riding, but again, don't think, which I'm sure
you would, and everybody would, including myself, when I first read it, that that's like
you need to moment, like, catch the intention in the moment, and encounter it rightly, it's
not like that, it's just basically recognizing the general intention, and then relinquishing
it, and you can always recognize the general intention by being aware of duke, and that's
it, so that's why suffering and freedom from suffering, that's all the Buddha teaches,
because if there is presence of duke, you know there is craving, you don't need to look
for it, how probably there isn't, how is it, no, I suffer, I mean, the craving is there,
so how can I, so to speak, tune my attitude whereby I'm mis-disagreeable, I'm not suffering
at all, not because I'm running away from disagreeable, not because I'm ignoring disagreeable,
not because I'm psychologizing the disagreeable and explaining myself, you know, I was because
my childhood with this or that, no, because I don't crave in regard to it, I don't fear
the pain, I don't lost pleasure, means you don't crave, you don't overshoot, you don't
step in, you don't run away, means you don't react in regard to agreeable or disagreeable,
means you don't suffer, and again disagreeable, you don't want to do it, you don't want to
do it, and again disagreeable and agreeable, it's not set in stone, can be, you know,
can arise in different extents, so that's another thing, because you might, you might
get used to a certain level of disagreeable and that ceases to cause you pain, suffering
mentally, but then the level of disagreeable increases and then you start suffering again,
you just, you know, training in regard to the extent of disagreeable, which is why you
don't have to go and torture yourself, as some ascetics thought they would have to, so
you're not training in regard to the extent of disagreeable, you're training in regard
to the nature of disagreeable, and you stop feeling the nature of disagreeable, the
extent becomes irrelevant, again to the point of high level, overestropping your names one
by one with a blunt saw, and you still won't be suffering with very disagreeable, I'm
just screaming disagreeable, but mentally you actually won't be feeling it or suffering
on a contrary, you overcome death, you overcome death, if the atmosphere disagreeable.
So as I was saying before, when puttu jena was statured by suffering, he suffers on a
counter that as well, because he compromised it and he knows no escape, when it's sold
to parna, or an area, he's statured by suffering, he doesn't suffer parna that, and then fully
developed parna, an area that becomes another hand, he's not touched given in the first place.
So for a so it's funny, he can suffer, but only to a certain extent, exactly, which is
well, he can suffer to the extent of seven little grains of sand in comparison to the Himalayas,
but obviously for him at the time that would be a lot of suffering, because that's all
suffering he has, there's no limit to suffering in a way, like people can take mountains
of it, or if there are no mountains, just a little grain, well again it's the suffering,
it's going to feel like a little suffering will feel as much as big suffering, suffering
is there, so for so the parna, the little suffering will be suffering, but again not, like
if he were to remember how he used to suffer, of course he won't suffer, it's only quite
a trivial matter, which is what gives even more confidence to the Buddha and the Dhamma
and the practice he has, which is why it's a confirmed confidence, he knows it for himself,
he can't suffer as much as before if he were wanted, but if he would just look then at
the suffering that he still can experience, oh yeah, there is still work to be done, but
not also the one who would, if the circumstances are right, and they don't get challenged
often, they might be quite complacent, because it is quite an accomplishment getting the
right view, again as the Buddha compared it to seven grains of sand in comparison to
the Himalayas, that's how little suffering is left for somebody with a right view, but
again, being complacent is an unwholesome state which means it should not be encouraged,
and the Buddha never did, he said, like some of my disciples might be suffering, I'm
saying I still go to them, and encourage them, and they're actually in a sense of urgency
and so on, why?
Because there is still work to be done, if there isn't work to be done, I wouldn't be
telling them to do the work, so so the parna can still experience a degree of suffering
in regard to disagreeable, even if he's careless, if he's not actively practicing or just
using the other hundred, but he knows it, he can't deceive himself about it, which is what
Petitian can do, as you are before, Petitian man almost certainly be experiencing suffering
all the time, and that is very much the case, and that's what the said that, is because
the human life it's not solely constitute of pain, people get enamored with it, intoxicated
with it, because it does have pleasures, but that's the thing, if Petitian is authentic
he would recognize that, yeah, look, all the circumstances around in my work, my family,
whatever else, it's all great, and I'm very, very happy, everything is going my way for
a little effort, and that's a fact, you don't deny that, no, no, no, that is suffering,
in a way it's not, it's very pleasant, but he also, if he's so aware of his pleasures,
he should also be aware that that can change the next moment, misfortune, accident, anything
like that, he's on life, so he needs to then recognize that the very foundations upon
which his current happiness rests are inaccessible to him, he has no control over it, no saying
it, can't even conceive that, so then that recognition is very unpleasant, even amidst
all the happiness you have.
Even that recognition, that would help him, not necessarily, he's fulfilling with anxiety,
and that's a very deep existential pain, suffering, and people who experience that, as the
Buddha said, they have like two outcomes, search for the relief, and that's when it helps
him, he has enough wisdom, enough composure to go out, or just mental derangement, and
you know, start taking pills, and extreme antidepressants, or whatever else, because you
can't hack it, alcohol, or extreme destruction in terms of alcohol or whatever else, yeah.
So he wouldn't necessarily help him, but it's certainly the prerequisite for him seeking
help, because that's it, you recognize, and you know, my experience was the same, there
was no misfortunes, nothing like that, quite actually comfortable, despite, you know,
what Serbia was going through, quite a comfortable life, very good job, no problems in any department
of life, but I recognize indeed, any department of life can be compromised at any given second,
not by you, by freak exit, by anything, and you cannot prevent it, that is very frightening,
and then again, that's the situation, he would say, you know, young men, whatever laymen,
recognizes, I am prey to suffering, I don't necessarily suffer, but the suffering might
be looming at the next moment, the next choice I make, the next thing I do, the result
for most people is freaking out, in anxiety, losing a grip, seeking, in very calmness, medical
help, checking down the pills, until they sometimes manage to forget about it, and move on,
cover enough enough that they are able to move on, or not, just become fully dependent,
and then lose, lose their mind completely, few other people who don't necessarily, for
maybe a bit stronger mentally, for them, recognition of that anxious sort of prospect
of, things can happen, and you won't be able to prevent it, and you won't be able to
not be affected by it, you are prey to suffering, suffering is a hunter, that you might, you
might come in its crosshairs, and then you recognize furthermore, oh, you will come in
its crosshairs, eventually, but most people don't have to wait to get, you know, get sick
and die, because you are attached to plenty of other things around you, when they change
you already be suffering, and that's the same nature, so you just start recognizing, yeah,
even if none of these things change, which is inconceivable, this life will come to an end
in time, so which means ultimately, it will result in that, so I'd better do something
about it, so recognition of that, of feeling like a prey, like a deer in a field, and you
know that a hunter's there, you can't see it, so then you can, I ignore the fact that
he might be there, and just pretend all of this grass is very tasty, and I'll just ignore
it, and enjoy it, while I can, before the hunter comes, oh, you'll think no, this grass
is useless to me, if I'm going to end up on a hunter's table, so I might just well
try and find a way out, and escape it, and that's when, you know, a young man goes forward
and comes out of faith, and so on, so basically, life can be very perfect, but recognition
of that life is not in your control, just that suffering, it's almost like everyone
somehow recognizes that's already, everybody, yeah, that's no, that's no, cover it up or
you start, cover it up, you don't cover it up, the whole life becomes an act of a cover
up, and I think I said that before recently, that's why people, that's where sensuality
and sensual pursuits are not often not optional for people, in a sense that their life has
been, has became a massive cover up, and now they fully is essentially dependent upon
sensual distraction, that's why I'm going to crash even harder when the senses start
to fail, and then death comes, but the point is basically, pursuing your desires as
if it's not like, oh, I'll do it, no, no, you have to, because those are the only means
of you floating, not sinking down, so you know, everybody knows it, every prospect,
that every given in of the desire, and every giving in towards the distraction, the core
reason of covering up the fact that you're not in control of the whole thing, it's present,
suffering, and that's happening, yeah, Sankara Dukka, everything is suffering, everything
can be a determination for your suffering, Sankara Dukka, for that reason, so it's only
Dukka that arises and Dukka that ceases, this is the right view, so it's Dukka that ceases,
there is only Dukka that arises and Dukka that ceases, it's ceasing and Dukka is, right
for you.
So, this is what I said, putugina suffers on account of his own, on account of suffering,
so it's only suffering that arises and suffering is ceases and he doesn't suffer on account
of that, and he pursues it long enough, hard enough, he's become another hunt and then
there won't be any suffering arising anymore, again, as I said, you can't have suffering
without disagreeable, you can have disagreeable without suffering, but because you are at the
end of suffering, as putugina, you actually have to go through that suffering until eventually
you just reach, oh, there is only the nuisance left on account of this body, only disagreeable
things that can arise on account of the senses, but not all of the suffering has been abolished,
and that's all right, it's an other hunt becomes another one, it says, any sort of disagreeable
experience that can arise, it's going to be an account of these five aggregates until
they break apart, but he doesn't suffer on account of it, and then when they break apart
even that disagreeable, their little annoyance of the five aggregates, still arising and
ceasing will go.
But for him, there's no suffering arises, no, so you first recognize the suffering, then
you recognize the nature of suffering, then you recognize the escape in regard to that
suffering, you recognize how it ceases, then you recognize what to do in order for it
to see it all together, and then you start doing it, and then you can, then you stop suffering
on account of not knowing escape from a reason suffering, so you hold it, well, even more,
and then you pursue even that further, and then even that suffering ceases, and all that
is left, it's for an other hunt, nuisance and annoyance that can arise, all my account
of the five aggregates still, or these senses operating on their own, these animals yanking
left and right, but they can't pull you in, you know, when they, when, when, when,
Andrew, Andrew, Andrew, and I think it was also that, when they were at the palace with
him, when he went back home and father got his, his, well, former wives to dress up and
try and seduce him, and kind of basically harass him, and he, and he said that, oh, and
he was another hunt, and he was saying, oh, just stop harassing me with his sights, sisters,
and then they fainted because he called him sisters, and then father gave him a gold, he said,
better throw that in the river, because he's going to be a source of your great misfortune
holding onto it, so yeah, these sights become annoying and harassing, when your eyes, the
habit of the animals, the five sense animals, basically the stimuli of the five senses being
a respective animal, they just, you know, they, oh, I'm going to go there, this is my feeling
you're hungry, they can't pull you, but they can still, uh, disagreeable, can be disagreeable,
and during the body, bearing the body, bearing the illness, bearing the discomfort,
it's disagreeable, Arun is aware of it, but he doesn't suffer any surgery, he doesn't fear it,
oh, fear of disagreeable, then prevents him to do so, no, he does not have that, because he knows
whatever disagreeable arises will cease, before him, sort up on the nose, whatever suffering
when accounting disagreeable arises will cease, but Tugina doesn't know even that, whatever suffering
on accounting disagreeable that arises for Tugina, he suffers on accounting that twice,
on a, on another level, and there's a similarly of the, how was it, the two errors, man gets hit
by one error, and then he struck whether pain does it, and then he gets struck by another error
on account of that, and that doesn't happen to an Arya Savaka, to a noble, to noble disciple basically,
he's struck by one error of suffering, but he knows his cape, from that pain that has a reason
on account of that error, so he's not struck by the second error of panic and fear, and this
is struck, his cape is not understanding, his cape is fully understood, before that things,
that's why he became a sort of runner, so no matter how painful, how sufferable things arise,
he wants to suffer on account of that, and then for an hour, and then he pursues it fully,
then they won't even arise, then it will only be like disagreeable arising, agreeable arising,
here the Buddha says, oh, sometimes a person comes and asks him for the instruction,
he tells them what to do, then they go and do it, he says, that the target is pleased,
if he finds that agreeable, then another man comes, and the word teaches him for an hour,
he goes in this completely opposite, he says, the target is pleased, he finds that disagreeable,
they said, but neither of those accounts do make the target that suffer, or get upset,
or get elated, with great joy, because somebody is following, he is instruction,
no, yes, oh, this is agreeable, that's suitable, that's not suitable, that's disagreeable,
so I must say, these terms, I don't know if we go through all them, but the dhamma is
open-air, leading to bringing the earth, leading on, yeah, I just wrote down some translation,
uh-huh, leading to bringing the earth, leading on, well it's basically, you need to see,
you know, if you know it, put it simply, in other words, you will develop the dhamma,
if you're trying to practice, but become so fun and then around, not by thinking you
need to do dhamma, but at the same time, knowing that you're still putugina, so understanding of
the dhamma leads you onwards, further or rather closer, and closer, and closer to the goal,
further or further away from being putugina, but it's not like, oh, I understood the dhamma,
and that's it, I keep my old ways of being putugina or whatever else, but I understood the dhamma,
that's not the dhamma then, because if you were to gain any understanding of the dhamma,
you would then recognize, oh, there is more, then you get the understanding of that more,
and then, oh, no, there is more, there is more, there is more, until the other hand says,
there is no more, everything has been completed, the task, you know, the burden has to be laid down,
there is no more, so it led him onwards until he reached the goal,
recognize suffering, sorry, you recognize suffering, and he fully freed himself from it,
so nature, because that's the thing, because again, you get, and there were different dhammas,
different teachings in the Buddha's day, and he said, well, not all dhamma actually felt it,
and why? Because, yeah, they would not be leading you to the final goal, or freedom,
so if your dhamma says, oh, understanding of this will free you from suffering,
then you understand that, but you're not free from suffering, that's either the wrong dhamma,
or you haven't understood it, that's why the faith in the Buddha's teaching has to come first,
in the same sense, you will have faith in a doctor when he prescribes your medicine,
because if you don't have faith in the Buddha's teaching, if you were to start practicing,
but you're not free from suffering, but you understood it, you think, okay, I understood this,
but it's not free from suffering, I'll go to something else, but if you have faith in the Buddha's
teaching, then you question yourself, you're not going to place the blame on the teaching, you say,
no, I have faith that this is right, yet I'm not free from suffering, means I haven't
fully understood it, so you make more effort and more, that's why it's a bit risky,
if you do pick up a wrong dhamma, a wrong teaching, a wrong instruction, even,
go to this Buddhism, you'll end up wasting, that's why the Buddha says it's like one of the worst
things, and certainly, in terms of the merit, it's presenting as dhamma, that which is not dhamma,
because see, you can obstruct many beings in finding the true dhamma, seeing on a kind of something
you just said, that kind of, you know, gain exposure and people heard it, and again, if you say
that faith in the Buddha's teaching, exactly, on a kind of faith of the Buddha, they thought
that what you were saying was right, they followed it for 50 years, and they haven't,
they're stupid to do that, and it's directly the result of what you basically misinterpreted.
Obviously, that doesn't mean if you say something by accident, that somebody misunderstands,
means you deep down knowing your pathudjana, and you go out and teach, and tell people how to practice dhamma.
It feels like no, but I'm doing it out of a good intention, yeah, good misguided intention,
and is that misguidedness? It's going to cost you a lot, because it will affect others, a lot more.
And left alone, if somebody intentionally, like fully, misrepresents, because you do hear a lot,
a dhamma talk, where someone will talk and say, ends will start off by saying, I don't know,
anything, but let me tell you how it is. It absorbs them a bit, it absorbs a bit, because they say,
I don't know, I'm stupidudjana, but I'll give you an hour long dhamma talk, which is a
contradiction in tell me, it wouldn't be a dhamma talk then, because talking about dhamma, it's not
a dhamma, but it's a different topic. It absorbs them a bit, because then it's a responsibility
on those listeners to then hold on, he said he doesn't know, I mean, I might stay and listen,
but I will certainly not take any great heed in it. But if they ignore that, and then carry on,
it's a bit more than then, but many people never, you know, they don't say that often enough,
they don't say often enough, hey, I don't know, but I'll talk, I'll talk to you. But I think they
end up just getting used to talking and end up just talking. And then people end up thinking,
oh, they know what they're talking about. So that's where a person who does want to learn and
place faith needs to be very careful, where they place their faith in. And that's why you never
compromise your intelligence, reasoning, discernment, even on account of faith. Like you discern,
you use what you, any tools you have, any grains of wisdom you have, you get them all together,
and then choose wisely where you place your faith as something that's least likely going to be
wrong, because you don't know what's right, what's wrong. So what is least likely to be mistaken
down the road? And even that, you try carefully, step by step. Obviously, then, you know,
if you did place it rightly or least wrongly, you will start to discern more and more,
which means more and more grains of wisdom will be adding up, which means more and more of the
right criteria will be shaping up, which means faster and faster you can go.
And this, this is a strange one. A, he passiga. A, he passiga. Inviting everyone to come and see
or open to all. Well, I think that's a bit of a liberal. It means come and see. Come and see.
You're done man. Yeah. Oh, I want to really, I'm interested with your teaching stuff.
Well, if you really, basically the teaching pretends only to be done. You can, as I said,
there is a difference between about the Dhamma and the Dhamma, and about the Dhamma is not the Dhamma,
and that's a very important distinction. So people who are about the Dhamma, you tell them,
no, come and see here. I do it. And that is what the Dhamma is not, but you, even if you're
peddling the very same phrases and words, you're not actually trying to see it for yourself.
Thus, it's not the Dhamma, it's a bother Dhamma, and that's not the Dhamma. So come and see it,
and then you'll know it. That's the only way to know it is to come and see it.
So, a, he passiga. Yeah.
And then, some detail. Again, come and see for yourself. You start doing it. The more you do it,
the more you see, the more you see, the more you can do it. But if it's about the Dhamma,
it can often have a, have a little bit of it quite quickly. Oh, okay, that's what Dhamma is,
but you're not really making that personal effort internally to see it and understand it,
it feels like something, so that's it. It stops there. Dhamma is this, this and that, and I can
talk about it. I can talk from a different angle about it, but it's kind of frozen,
which is why it's not the Dhamma. The only Dhamma, the real Dhamma is the Dhamma,
it does the leads on. It's visible, they can be seen individually by the wise and those who make
effort. And it comes. Sorry. It comes about timeless. Yeah. It's simultaneously. It doesn't
pertain to your past, your future, basically. I mean, I don't know how it's always in the present,
because there's no choice about that. But basically timeless means it doesn't pertain to time,
literally. So, the principles of Dhamma are right there present, and your past is within those
principles, your future is within those principles, and your present is already within those principles
of the present Dhamma, the universals of your ingredients, the nature. Because it's the thing
that says, let be the past and the future. I will teach you the Dhamma with this, this is.
Yeah, because as we spoke before, your past is present, your future is present. You can think
about your past and then give it time, and you're doing it in the present. You can think ahead,
plan your future, and you're thinking that right there and then in the present, or you can think
about present things in the present. So, you have past, present, future, and they're all within
the domain present, and there's no choice about that. So, when the Buddha talks about present,
he talks about that general domain of present, in which past, future, and present are present.
He doesn't talk about that little present that's in between past and future, whereby
don't think about it, past, don't fantasize about the future, just being the present. You can help
him. Because it's not really past, future, present. It's either past, present,
a present future, sorry, past, present, or future, present. So, it's over-determined and under-determined
in regard to the determinant, which is present. The linear of past, future, present, it's a fantasy.
We always, like, in regard to present, things they were overly determined, things they were gone,
things they were done, that's your past. Or if you look at the other, the opposite way,
in regard to this present, things that are yet to be, that's your future, but both are already within
the present. So, you can't stop thinking about the past or planning about the future,
what you can do is basically not forget or not you know that you're doing it presently.
But you want to see the principle? Well, that is already the principle.
Yeah. That's already the principle. And especially when it comes down to
Dharma, as a teaching, if you talk about the principle of Patitian Father, which is the time
in this principle, principle of Akali ka, that's simultaneous present. With this, this is.
So, with appearance, existence is, or we spoke before, or with craving, suffering is.
Simultaneously present to the same extent. So, no, and that is very important to bring down and
start discerning it to get a simultaneously to the same extent. Why? Because you say,
suffering is because of craving. People immediately assume, natural assume,
it's the craving that arises and then, and use in time for a while, if they are craving,
I crave, I'm doing this. And then the suffering follows. No.
The suffering is in the very presence of craving. That's what suffering is.
So, you could say it's the same thing, but it's not because it can be discerned.
But it's certainly simultaneously present things.
So, you can't possibly disjoin them and just say craving and look at the craving
without suffering being present at the time. Nor can you be thinking about suffering
and discerning suffering without craving being present at the time. So, it's timeless.
And no matter how much time externally might be passing, notion of time might be passing.
This principle of simultaneous present is the present. It's that general present which has
past is already determined, and future is under-determined in regard to the journey.
I've heard a few things.
Maybe it's craving and then something will rise in the future. There's maybe a possibility that
it might not arise in the future. Exactly. So, I mean else might not. Which means,
exactly. So, therefore craving is not. Therefore, craving is not the time is the determination of
the suffering which you have picked up by the sense it is. With craving, suffering is.
You might want to learn how to crave. Well, exactly. And not suffering.
But you recognize, okay, so it's the presence of craving
results in the presence of suffering right there and then to the same extent. So, if the craving
ceases, suffering cannot remain even for a nanosecond afterwards without suffering. So,
it's simultaneously arising and simultaneously ceasing. And that is the recognition of a
titan part. Now, obviously, if you have the ultimate, the greatest wisdom of the Sama-Sanghuda,
then that one principle of simultaneous arising, simultaneous ceasing, you can sort of describe
and divide many, many, many different. Well, 12 or more in digonika, when you just start
describing a titan part, it's slightly different terms later on and so on. So, you can go
in all this intricately, but it's still the same principle. That's why every titan part starts
with this, this is. And then we what? And then it goes on. It within that principle. And that's what,
and that, and yeah, he did say, one who's in a cycle that says, one who sees dama, sees
become part of the one, sees, but it's some part of sees the dama. Because that's what the dama is.
It's that principle. Principle of simultaneous presence. And you can, again, you don't have to go
into all of the intricate, very, very subtle descriptions of the Buddha and the titan part.
You can just take the very coarse division of mind and body. Because those are general phenomena,
regular as such. And if you start seeing your body as well inconceivable without the presence of
the mind, and vice versa, the mind would be inconceivable. Like, you might as, like, and that's it,
by not thinking about it, by not discerning it as inconceivable, you end up conceiving it through
your assumption that it might stay on. It might. My mind might stay on in the body breaks apart.
You conceive, many people conceive that through the assumption of it might. And that's it.
What you just said before, you don't necessarily know, but just the fact that you don't see it
simultaneously, you allow the possibility for it to enter. And that possibility is more than enough
for the assumption of, yes, it will. But if you were to think long enough, and it is,
whenever you think about your mind, there is an image of the body, at least in the background,
or at least right here right now. If this body, physical body, is not operating,
if this heart is not pumping, if this brain is not working, you wouldn't be able to think.
Why? Because any experience of thinking that you know of, that you can think of, that you can
imagine, even in the future, implies the notion of your body, thus it's inseparable from it.
It's some kind. And same again, if you were to start thinking about the body,
you're like, well, I'm thinking about it, thus, mentally, accessing it, so to speak. So that's
the only way you can. There is a pure sense, sense in itself, it's not aware of itself,
thus it's not. But with the mind, they are discerned, they meet in it, they appear in it.
So, to be able to see the extent of possibility, judging by that, things can only go so far,
like it can only go so far. Well, I'm not sure. But the mind is not, not everything is possible,
it can't survive by itself. Okay, yeah, yeah, yeah, okay, that's what you mean, yeah, sure, yeah.
I don't understand, I don't mean by the extent of all the possible, no, basically what you're saying,
seeing the nature of possibilities. Again, you have to have a reason thing in order for possibilities
to be possible in regard to what has a reason, thus possibilities in itself cannot resist.
They cannot remain standing if there is not that which is possible, what they are possible in regard to.
That's what it is. So that's the thing, like, you can assume the possibility that you don't know
your mind, my carry on, your consciousness, my carry on itself. But if you stop to think about it,
intelligently, authentically recognize that any notion, any designation of your mind, of your
consciousness is known in this experience as such. And even if you think about the future after
your death, so to speak, you are assuming some sort of material body. You are. There is, like, not,
not, not, not like voluntarily, but it's implied in the notion of mind continuing, why? Because
you only know mind as inseparable from, because it is inseparable from. So then the question is
basically just, sorry, the task is then to discern the notions of physical body that you carry
in the assumptions of your mind in the future. And then the assumptions of the mind as free from
body and everything else will just cease. And it's inconceivable, even in theory, to just think about
the mind without the body. Even that actually affected by that principle of being inseparable from.
And if you look at it closely, you'll see, like, if you think my mind in the future,
but you are there assuming most likely, most often, as your body is basically your own face,
face of your own physical image, that you associate with that notion of mind, that it's now
implied in that my mind. My mind, but at the very end of that image of my mind, there is a
picture of Tanya sending. If you push it far enough, you'll see, oh, you apply, you imply
your current form in that notion of my mind, because my mind is inseparable from the form,
even in theory. For a sense of mind, a sense of mind. Yeah, well that's the thing, that sense of
mind or sense of form stands for that which form is. You don't actually have to have the physical,
because even the physical physical is only a form of a sense of this kind of present.
Currently present.
Because I said, if you try and think about your body right here, right now, look at it.
You know it, an aspect of it, because they appear mentally. These images appear mentally.
That's form, root, and itself. It's inconceivable, but you perceive it through the assumption.
You could see nature, seeing houses. How do you simulate it here, isn't it?
Simultaneous, the reason. So again, as I said, you don't have to, you don't have to go into
intricate details of the physical father, just discover the principle where this, this is,
and then drill everything through that, that's your gateway, that principle.
Presence of the mind, present, like two separate domains that exist. You don't have to say,
the core exists directly, the AAPS simultaneously, and they are, like, impossible to discern one part from the other.
So even when you're just thinking abstractly about one, I don't want to apply in that thought.
You're better.
Well, you can come down even slightly closer, and you can even say, well,
which would be able to think about the future and your mind carrying on, if this body is not
living right here right now, which would be able to have those thoughts that pertain to the future,
if this body is not breathing right there while you're thinking it, you wouldn't.
So no matter how separate, how different it feels, it arranges together, and that's why it's hard to see it.
Because it only pertains to the simple nature of simultaneous presence, nothing else in common.
Thus, it's so easy to assume that they are not in this body. They might, they're two different entities,
they're two separate entities, they're like, you know, they might sort of, one is like the other one's
right, they might do things together or whatever else. But it's hard to just see to discern
that the only thing they really have in common is that they're simultaneously present,
and you can't see one without the other, and then you build one that.
Because no matter how pleasing your fantasy about, well, my mind, my consciousness will continue
because it makes sense, because of this, because of that, you're thinking those very things right there,
right now in that very present moment while your body is breathing. Their body,
their heart stops at the time, right there, and then, would you be able to continue those thoughts?
When the only thoughts you know so far, and the thoughts that you're trying to send into
future as valid facts are known because of the breathing body right here right now.
So you actually have no concept of what experience of mind without a living body would be.
And even when you think about the possibility of it, it already implies that both
you're living because you're thinking about the possibility of it while you're living.
So you can't step outside of it. And fortunately, you don't need it.
All you have to do is stop assuming it. See one depending on the other and you, your sense of self,
completely redundant. And because it's redundant, it will fade by itself through the cultivation of
this simultaneous, through this principle of simultaneity, but it's a pattern. So you don't have to
see your mind as inseparable from the body and the body as indistinguishable without a mind.
You don't have to see that first and then free yourself from the, you know, self view and I am, no.
Freedom from those things will be the result of seeing that principle.
Because the body is there, given the reason and the mind in regard to it.
There's no room for yourself.
And by knowing that there can't be any sense of self in regard to those things because they
did a different to it. It's just mind and body. Two sticks holding each other.
You remove one, the other one goes with it. But not knowing that you can't, all those things
could come control, can't, can't be in them. You place yourself in there, you assume, you assume
you are. But fully discerning that you can't be there, you stop assuming that you are there,
because now you know that you can't be there.
So this mind right here, right there and this body right here, right there, whatever,
for you, yours, for me, mind. It's present. And then you can have all the, you know,
on a more particular level, all the experiences of this sense, of that sense, this emotion,
of that emotion, this aggregate, of that aggregate, depending on the approach you have. But basically,
you do need body living body and consciousness in regard to it.
So those two things and they are inaccessible to you.
You cannot prove to your consciousness or you cannot prove to the consciousness.
No, can you take hold of that, of that physical, as a physical material form.
They simultaneously arise, they simultaneously cease.
So what you can do is remove desire and lust in regard to them and then it won't be any problems.
These are the lust that manifests through basically lust or aversion or delusion.
In regard to that inaccessible, in regard to the principle of those inaccessible things,
matter and consciousness. And when I say inaccessible, I mean, I work like that,
I mean, you can't take hold of it, you can't even think consciousness. And you must certainly
kind of think pure form because, well, you already can see a continuation thinking pure form.
That's a thought, that's not pure form. And even the idea of something being a pure form
can only be known as a thought of that which pure form might be, thus it's a thought in its nature.
So how can I know pure form? You can't. We can just remove its footing,
it's appropriation. So you can't touch it and you're done. That's all you need to do.
The point is that to see it over and over and over.
Array for the tissue. Drilling. Drilling. Training. That's why the Buddha said he trains himself
lust, he trains it. Just training, repeating, therefore training gives repetition. Just repeating,
training, and training, and increasing, and training, and so on.